1 - For this try document mining (to find where proof is required or dépends like the case for having sufficient talent)
""
✅ Step 1 — Add a “Evidence Requirement” label

For each requirement, annotate:

📄 Document-required

🗣️ Oral/implicit allowed

❓ Unknown / ambiguous

✅ Step 2 — Condition your metrics
Case A: Document-required

Use normal RAG metrics:

Context Recall

Context Precision

Faithfulness

👉 Here retrieval matters

Case B: Oral / implicit allowed

👉 IGNORE retrieval metrics

Instead evaluate:

Label correctness (κ, F1)

Reasoning quality (LLM-as-judge or rubric)

4. Add a “Justification Type” Output

Modify your LLM output to include:

{
  "compliance": "partial",
  "justification_type": "document | oral | inferred",
  "evidence": "...",
  "confidence": 0.82
}
Then define metrics per type:
📄 Document-based

Retrieval metrics ON

Faithfulness ON

🗣️ Oral-based

Retrieval metrics OFF

Evaluate:

consistency

plausibility

agreement with human
""


2- ✔️ Weighted Cohen’s Kappa (κ)

Use when:

You compare model vs human OR annotator A vs annotator B

Idea:

It measures:

“How much better is the agreement than random, while accounting for closeness of labels”

Key concept: weights

You assign penalties like:

True \ Pred	Not	Partial	Yes
Not	0	1	2
Partial	1	0	1
Yes	2	1	0

Then normalize → bigger distance = bigger penalty

So:

Yes vs Partial → small penalty ✅

Yes vs Not → big penalty ❌

👉 This is exactly what you want.


3- For the structured JSON / field extraction, use:

Strict exact match on required fields for a hard pass/fail view.

Field/entity-level F1 for the main extraction score.

A soft-match / edit-distance metric for partial credit when values are close but not identical.
Exact-match entity F1 is standard in document information extraction, while soft-match metrics like tree edit distance were introduced to avoid over-penalizing small surface differences.

For the retrieval step of RAG, the most useful metrics are:

Context recall: did you retrieve the relevant evidence?

Context precision: did you rank relevant chunks above irrelevant ones?

Context entities recall: did you retrieve the key facts/entities?
Ragas provides all three, and its docs define context precision as ranking relevant chunks higher, while context recall focuses on not missing important information.

If ranking quality matters, add MRR and nDCG@k. MRR is the reciprocal of the rank of the first relevant document, and NDCG is a widely used ranking metric for retrieval.

For the generation / groundedness step, add faithfulness and answer relevance. Ragas includes both in its RAG evaluation set, and faithfulness is defined as factual consistency of the answer with the retrieved context.


4- do mining on some documents that already exists and try Hypothetical Document Embeddings in a smart way instead of halucinations
